Depression comes in three kinds. The first is called normal depression,
and it is the type each of us knows well. It springs from the pain and
loss that are inevitable parts of being members of a sapient species,
creatures who think about the future.

The two other kinds of depression are called depressive disorders:
unipolar and bipolar despression. What determines the difference of 
them is whether or not mania is involved. Mania is psychological 
condition with a set of symptoms that look like the opposite of
despression: unwarranted euphoria grandiosity, frenetic talk and action,
and inflated self-esteem.

Bipolar depression always involves manic episodes; it is also called
manic-depression (with mania as one pole and depression as the other).
Unipolar depressives never have manic episodes. Another differnece 
between the two is that bipolar depression is much more heritable. If
one of the two identical twins has bipolar depression, there is a 72
percent chance the other also has it. Unlike normal and unipolar 
depression, manic-depression is an illness, appropriately viewed as a
disorder of the body and treated medically.

Both normal depression and unipolar depression involve the same four
types of negative change: in thought, mood, behavior, and physical
responses.

Everything she wanted fell into her lap.

One of the four criteria of depression is a negative change in thought.

When you're depressed, small obstacles seem like insurmountable barriers. You believe everything you touch turns to ashes.

A pessimistic explanatory style is at the core of depressed thinking. A negative concept of the future, the self, and the world stems from seeing the causes of bad events as permanent, pervasive, and personal, and seeing the causes of good events in the opposite way.

The second way we recognize both unipolar and normal depreesion is a negative change in mood.

Life goes sour. Formerly enjoyable activities become savorless mockeries. Jokes are no longer funny but unbearably ironic.

A depressed mood is not usually unbroken. It changes with time of day. Typically it is near its worst just when you wake up. Thoughts of your past defeats and of the losses the new day is sure to bring may overwhelm you while you are lying in bed. If you stay in bed, your mood will lie upon you like a clammy sheet. Getting up and beginning the day lightens the mood, which usually improves as the day goes on, although it will worsen again a bit during the low time of your basic rest and activity cycle (BRAC), usually from three to six P.M. Evening is likely to be the least depressed time of day. Three to five A.M., if you are awake, is the worst.

Sadness is not the only mood of depression; anxiety and irritability are often present. But when depression gets very intense, anxiety and hostility drop away and the sufferer becomes numb and blank.

The third symptom of depression concerns behavior. The depressive shows three behavioral symptoms: passivity, indecisiveness, and suicidal action.

These four symptoms-negative changes in thought, mood, behavior, and physical response-diagnose depression, whether unipolar or normal. To be considered depressed, you don't need to have all four symptoms, and it's not necessary that any particular symptom be present. The more symptoms you have, however, and the more intense each is, the more certain you can be the problem is depression.


